The Scientist

AbulKalam M. Shamsuddin, M.B.,B.S., PhD, is Professor of Pathology at the University of Maryland School of Medicine in Baltimore, MD, U. S. A. Prof Shamsuddin graduated from University of Dhaka - Dhaka Medical College. Following Internship in Massachusetts and Residency training in pathology in Maryland, he was certified by the American Board of Pathology in 1977 when he joined the faculty of the University of Maryland School of Medicine as an Instructor. In 1980, he received Ph.D. from the University of Maryland for his research on colon carcinogenesis and rose through the ranks of Assistant Professor and Associate Professor to become a full Professor in 1988. For his excellence in teaching, Professor Shamsuddin received the Best Teacher award from the medical students many times, including the coveted "Golden Apple Award" by the American Medical Students' Associ-ation in 1999.

Prof. Shamsuddin has been studying the process of cancer formation and the prevention of cancer since 1975. His research in the steps of colon cancer formation resulted in the development of a very simple and accurate screening test for colon cancer. This rather inexpensive test detects cancers at a very early stage, and even before they have formed; in other words, it can also detect precancerous polyps and other precancerous lesions and conditions. The test has been in use in China since the early 1990's! He further discovered that the colon cancer marker Gal-GalNAc is a common cancer marker expressed through a similar "field-effect" phenomenon; thus forming the basis for a general cancer screening test such as for cancer of the lungs and breast, and possibly prostate and uterine cervix; hopefully these tests will be available world-wide in the not-too-distant future. His book on the subject "Diagnostic Assays for Colon Cancer" by CRC Press (1991) was written for health-care professionals.

A veteran of Bangladesh Liberation War, Prof. Shamsuddin was the founding President of IP-6 Foundation, Inc (Baltimore, USA) and Komolpur Janakallyan Trust (Dhaka, Bangla-desh), non-profit organizations to support health-care and economic empowerment in rural Bangladesh. 

 In mid 1985, Prof. Shamsuddin started his pioneering experiments on the anti-cancer property of inositol and inositol hexaphosphate (IP6) - natural constituents of cereals and legumes such as rice, corn, beans etc. For the next decade and a half, he has reconfirmed and expanded his groundbreaking studies to show the efficacy of IP6 and inositol against different cancers in various experimental models. Realizing the enormous potential for health benefits of IP6 and inositol for humans and the general lack of this knowledge, he became most instrumental in organizing the First International Symposium of Disease Prevention by IP6 and Other Rice Components in Kyoto, Japan [June 8-9, 1998]. Prof. Shamsuddin's latest book on the subject is IP6 + Inositol: Nature's Medicine for the Millennium. (His previous book is still available in Japanese). Aside from these Prof. Shamsuddin has contributed numerous book-chapters and has authored over 200 scientific publications.